---
title: EMs are better than PX
layout: post
hero: 2016-05-03-ems-hero.jpg
---

It's pretty arbitrary which unit we Web Designers and Developers end up using - while it may seem the pixel, `px` is founded in the reality of how displays work and therefore is effectively the *quanta* of scale on the web, this [isn't actually the case.](http://inamidst.com/stuff/notes/csspx)
{: .feature}

So, what's actually wrong with the pixel? Well, it's not intrinsically flawed, but that doesn't mean there aren't better alternatives. For one, it's misleading to think of it as representing a single physical pixel - as we've seen, it's actually an angular measurement, relative to the resolution of the viewport.

Furthermore, **Responsive Design** has almost completely eclipsed the two-site design pattern, so it's likely that you're going to make use of `@media` queries somewhere in your stylesheets. As designers we're aware that our content needs to smoothly transition across platforms, looking good on both a 3" screen and a 30" screen. We're mostly concerned with the transition from portrait, touch driven experiences to mouse driven landscape desktops and tablets, using grid systems and responsive column systems to re-arrange our layouts, but type often doesn't get the attention it needs, being too big on mobile and tiny on a massive iMac.

Enter the em, which is simply defined as the width of the capital **M** in it's element, and the closely related rem, the width of a **M** in the body's font size.

Cascading Value
===============

Em's killer feature is that they cascade recursively - due to inheritance, '1em' is the inherited font size from the parent element, so `1.2em` is 1.2 times that.

<figure class="center sheet">
  <div class="padder bigger">
    <span style="font-size: 1.2em;">
      one &nbsp;
      <span style="font-size: 1.2em;">
        two &nbsp;
        <span style="font-size: 1.2em;">
          three &nbsp;
          <span style="font-size: 1.2em;">
            four &nbsp;
            <span style="font-size: 1.2em;">
              five
            </span>
          </span>
        </span>
      </span>
    </span>
  </div>
  <figcaption>
    Each span's <code>em</code> is successively 1.2 times bigger
  </figcaption>
</figure>

{% highlight html %}
<span style="font-size: 1.2em;">
  one
  <span style="font-size: 1.2em;">
    two
    <span style="font-size: 1.2em;">
      three
      <span style="font-size: 1.2em;">
        four
        <span style="font-size: 1.2em;">
          five
        </span>
      </span>
    </span>
  </span>
</span>
{% endhighlight %}

Cascading values are particularly useful for maintaining proportions between elements, so margins and padding keep the same amount of negative space around objects even when scaled up or down. If we don't want to have our values scale, and always be the same, the closely related `rem` exists which is always relative to the global `<body>` font size.

This cascade had one really nice effect: If we use `em` and `rem` everywhere, we can responsively scale the **entire** page, text, divs, borders, everything just by changing the body font size:

{% highlight css %}
body {
    font-size: 10pt;
}

@media(min-width: 480px){
    body {
        font-size: 12pt;
    }
}

@media(min-width: 1080px){
    body {
        font-size: 14pt;
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}


Responsive Text
===============

Similarly, if you build a set of styles and classes that look good, you can use simple rules to scale all of those up, without having weird things happen to spacing or having to rewrite a ton of rules. This makes responsively and contextually changing font sizes easy. 

<figure class="redge sheet" style="max-width: 396px;">
  <style scoped>
    .em-demo {
    background-color: rgba(89, 211, 128, 0.2);
    font-size: 1.5em;
    padding-left: 1em;
    border-bottom: 0.3rem solid #FFF;
    line-height: 1.4em;
    width: 100%;
    color: #FFF;
    font-weight: bold;
    }
  </style>
  <div class="em-demo">
    <div class="em-demo">
      <div class="em-demo">
        <div class="em-demo">
          M
        </div>
        M
      </div>
      M
    </div>
    M
  </div>
  <figcaption>
    The same class, applied recursively demonstrating both <code>em</code> for padding and <code>rem</code> for the white border.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

There's a fair amount of research that's gone into optimising the readability of content; 50 to about 75 characters per line appears to be ideal, and pushing past that it quickly becomes very hard for the reader to follow your text. Many well designed sites whose focus is textual content, such as [Medium.com](https://medium.com) and [The Guardian](http://www.theguardian.com) (2016 Webby Winner) are designed so their flowing prose falls well within this range. Designing so that this is always the case using px/pt is *not easy*, as piece of text you want to scale needs it's own set of media queries and breakpoints. With em it's pretty simple:

{% highlight css %}
article {
  font-size: 1.2em;
}
{% endhighlight %}



This easy scaling is also great for accessibility, as a user can change the browser's default font size and our interfaces will scale accordingly in their entirety, instead of just the text blowing up and overflowing.

We can do even weirder stuff using the rarely-used but powerful `vh, vw, vmin, vmax` viewport-based units to decide on the base reference that all out em values are calculated from. This approach is pretty new, with the viewport units arriving with CSS3 but it's now possible to have a continuously responsive design as well as the discrete breakpoints we currently use.

Gotchas
-------

Of course, ems aren't completely flawless. You'll struggle to copy-paste someone else's styles into yours and have it work perfectly the first time - the base font sizes used for cascading might be different (though at least the proportions will be in-tact). Support for ems is good with *modern* browsers, of course going as far back as IE8 will give you problems.

The em vs px debate continues, with periodic shifts in favourability between the two, though it should be noted that [Bootstrap 4 has switched](http://blog.getbootstrap.com/2015/08/19/bootstrap-4-alpha/) to ems & rems, citing improved responsive type. With bootstrap's wide use and popularity, ems seem set for a big increase in usage.

<em class="muted smaller">Also published on <a href="https://medium.com/@anangusp/ems-are-better-than-px-51203648803d#.f41n29x9i">Medium</a></em>

